[VARIANT] Accept variantShredding RFC (#6696)
delta-io/delta: PROTOCOL.md

Reviewer: We should probably add a bullet here to forward-reference `variantShredding` as well?

## Variant data in Parquet

The Variant data type is logically represented as two binary encoded values, according to the [Parquet Variant binary encoding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md).
The two binary values are named `value` and `metadata`.

> In parquet files, Variant can be represented in a "[shredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)" format or an "[unshredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)" format. Tables containing "shredded" variants also contain the [Variant Shredding](#variant-shredding) feature.

Reviewer: The spec doesn't usually talk about tables "containing" features. Can we rework this with the usual supported and enabled language?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In parquet files, Variant can be represented in a "[shredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)" format or an "[unshredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)" format. Tables containing "shredded" variants must also enable the [Variant Shredding](#variant-shredding) feature.
```

When writing unshredded Variant data to parquet files, the Variant data is written as a single Parquet struct, with the following fields:

Struct field name | Parquet primitive type | Description
-|-|-
value | binary | The binary-encoded Variant value, as described in [Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)
metadata | binary | The binary-encoded Variant metadata, as described in [Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

The parquet struct must include the two struct fields `value` and `metadata`.
Supported writers must write the two binary fields, and supported readers must read the two binary fields.

## Writer Requirements for Variant Data Type

When Variant type is supported but Variant shredding is not supported (`writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantType` but does not contain `variantShredding`), writers:

> - must write a column of type `variant` to parquet in the "unshredded" representation as a struct containing the fields `value` and `metadata` and storing values that conform to the [Variant binary encoding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

Reviewer 2: [AI Assisted] By scoping this section to *"but Variant shredding is not supported"*, when both `variantType` and `variantShredding` are in `writerFeatures` and `delta.enableVariantShredding != true`, the writer's only directive becomes "must not be written as a shredded Variant, but as an unshredded Variant" (in [Writer Requirements for Variant Shredding](#writer-requirements-for-variant-shredding)) — without re-pointing at the unshredded struct schema (`value`, `metadata`). Two ways to close this gap:

1. Leave this section unscoped (drop the *"but Variant shredding is not supported"* qualifier) so the unshredded format requirement always applies, OR
2. In the Writer Requirements for Variant Shredding section, add an explicit back-reference: "…must be written as an unshredded Variant **as defined in [Variant data in Parquet](#variant-data-in-parquet)**."

Also related: the original bullet *"must not write a parquet struct field named `typed_value` to avoid confusion with the field required by Variant shredding with the same name"* was removed. That safeguard is still meaningful for the variantType-only case (where shredding is not in `writerFeatures`) — without it, a non-shredding writer is silently allowed to emit a `typed_value` column that readers will misinterpret. Suggest restoring this bullet, scoped to the variantType-only case.

Author: Disagree with this. This section does not talk about the `enableVariantShredding` flag and only specifies that variant must be written as unshredded if only `variantType` is present and `variantShredding` is not present. Variant may be written as shredded if `variantShredding` is also present.

The `typed_value` requirement is also unnecessary. Simply specifying unshredded format serves the purpose. The section is complete as is in my opinion.

## Reader Requirements for Variant Data Type

When Variant type is supported but Variant shredding is not supported (`readerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantType` but does not contain `variantShredding`), readers:
- must recognize and tolerate a `variant` data type in a Delta schema
- must use the correct physical schema (struct-of-binary, with fields `value` and `metadata`) when reading a Variant data type from file
- must make the column available to the engine:
    - [Recommended] Expose and interpret the struct-of-binary as a single Variant field in accordance with the [Parquet Variant binary encoding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md).
    - [Alternate] Expose the raw physical struct-of-binary, e.g. if the engine does not support Variant.

>     - [Alternate] Convert the struct-of-binary to a string, and expose the string representation, e.g. if the engine does not support Variant.

Reviewer 2: [AI Assisted] Same scoping concern as the writer requirements above. By restricting this section to *"but Variant shredding is not supported"*, the "make the column available to the engine" rules (Recommended/Alternate exposure as Variant / raw struct / string) no longer apply when `variantShredding` is in `readerFeatures`. The new [Reader Requirements for Variant Shredding](#reader-requirements-for-variant-shredding) section only covers schema recognition; it does not restate engine-exposure semantics.

Since the spec already requires `variantType` to be in protocol whenever `variantShredding` is, the cleanest fix is to drop the *"but Variant shredding is not supported"* qualifier here and let these requirements apply unconditionally. Alternatively, the Reader Requirements for Variant Shredding section should explicitly state "all Reader Requirements for Variant Data Type continue to apply, plus…".

Author: If these requirements applied unconditionally, readers would be required to read variants as `struct-of-binary` even if `variantShredding` was present. Leaving it as is

## Variant data in Parquet

The Variant data type is logically represented as two binary encoded values, according to the [Parquet Variant binary encoding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md).
The two binary values are named `value` and `metadata`.

In parquet files, Variant can be represented in a "[shredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)" format or an "[unshredded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)" format. Tables containing "shredded" variants must also enable the [Variant Shredding](#variant-shredding) feature.

When writing unshredded Variant data to parquet files, the Variant data is written as a single Parquet struct, with the following fields:

Struct field name | Parquet primitive type | Description
-|-|-
value | binary | The binary-encoded Variant value, as described in [Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)
metadata | binary | The binary-encoded Variant metadata, as described in [Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

> 

Reviewer: This is the third and fourth appearance of the same link in as many sentences (L1863, L1866, L1872, L1873). In all, I count nine links to the variant encoding spec.

Do we _really_ need to link the same thing so many times? Could we at least add anchor references to specific parts of the spec?

Delta Column Statistics | **Supported:** A Variant column supports the `nullCount` statistic. <br/> **Conditionally Supported:** A Variant column supports `minValues` and `maxValues` statistics if the table also contains the Variant shredding feature (see [Statistics for Variant Columns](#statistics-for-variant-columns)).
Generated Columns | **Supported:** A Variant column is allowed to be used as a source in a generated column expression, as long as the Variant type is not the result type of the generated column expression. <br/> **Unsupported:** The Variant data type is not allowed to be the result type of a generated column expression.
Delta CHECK Constraints | **Supported:** A Variant column is allowed to be used for a CHECK constraint expression.
Default Column Values | **Supported:** A Variant column is allowed to have a default column value.
Change Data Feed | **Supported:** A table using the Variant data type is allowed to enable the Delta Change Data Feed.

# Variant Shredding

This feature enables support for shredding of the Variant data type, to store and query Variant data more efficiently.

> Shredding a Variant value is taking paths from the Variant value, and storing them as a typed column in the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shredding a Variant value takes paths from the Variant value, and stores them as typed columns in the file.
```

The shredding does not duplicate data, so if a value is stored in the typed column, it is removed from the Variant binary.
Storing Variant values as typed columns is faster to access, and enables data skipping with statistics.

The `variantShredding` feature depends on the `variantType` feature.

To support this feature:
- The table must be on Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7
- The feature `variantType` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

> - The feature `variantShredding` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

Reviewer 2: [AI Assisted] Consider restructuring this as an explicit `## Enablement` subsection to mirror how other features document support vs. enablement (e.g., [In-Commit Timestamps](#in-commit-timestamps), [Type Widening](#type-widening)). Today the new section blends *support* (feature in protocol) and *enablement* (the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property) into the writer requirements, which makes it inconsistent with the rest of the spec.

Suggested structure:

```
## Enablement
- The table must be on Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7.
- Both `variantType` and `variantShredding` must exist in `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.
- The table property `delta.enableVariantShredding` must be set to `true` in order for writers to produce shredded files.
```

The writer/reader requirements sections can then refer back to enablement cleanly, and the symmetric "`variantShredding` must be in protocol when `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`" rule fits naturally as an enablement invariant rather than a writer obligation.

Author: Done

> Tables supporting Variant Shredding may also contain parquet files containing Variants represented in the "unshredded" format.

Reviewer 2: [AI Assisted] Worth being explicit about whether shredded and unshredded Variant columns can coexist *within the same parquet file* (not just across files in the same table). This question came up during the original RFC discussion. If yes, suggest extending this sentence:

> Tables supporting Variant Shredding may also contain parquet files containing Variants represented in the "unshredded" format, **and individual files may freely mix shredded and unshredded Variant columns**.

If no, the current wording can stay but should explicitly say "a single parquet file must use the same representation for all Variant columns."

Author: Done

## Shredded Variant data in Parquet

Shredded Variant data is stored according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md).
The shredded Variant data written to parquet files is written as a single Parquet struct, with the following fields:

Struct field name | Parquet primitive type | Description
-|-|-
metadata | binary | (required) The binary-encoded Variant metadata, as described in [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)
value | binary | (optional) The binary-encoded Variant value, as described in [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

> typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type, representing the data stored in the Variant. Details of the shredding scheme is found in the [Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)

Reviewer: I don't think it's helpful to provide the exact same link four times in as many sentences? Why doesn't the first reference suffice at L1922 above?

Author: Simplified a bit

> typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type, representing the data stored in the Variant. Details of the shredding scheme is found in the [Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)

Reviewer: Does shredding really support _every_ parquet type? Or should we just link to the actual list of types?
https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md#shredded-value-types

Reviewer: Claude points out that:
> A typed_value column in shredded Variant must use one of the types in the shredding table (or compositions via ARRAY/OBJECT). The general Parquet spec supports additional primitive and logical types such as INT96, FLOAT16, ENUM, unsigned INT logical types, INTERVAL, JSON, BSON, GEOMETRY, GEOGRAPHY, MAP, UNKNOWN, etc.

Author: Is explicitly stating this restriction necessary if we already claim a link to the Parquet variant shredding spec? Can we just say "This can be any Parquet type so long as the shredding scheme adheres to the Parquet Variant Shredding spec."

Author: Done

## Writer Requirements for Variant Shredding

When Variant Shredding is supported (`writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantShredding`), writers:
- must respect the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property configuration. If `delta.enableVariantShredding` is not present or if it is set to any value other than `true`, a column of type `variant` must not be written as a shredded Variant, but as an unshredded Variant. If `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`, the writer can choose to shred a Variant column according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md).

> - must ensure the `variantShredding` table feature is present in the table protocol's `writerFeatures` and `readerFeatures` when enabling the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property, i.e. setting `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be simpler and cleaner to require that `variantType` be supported any time `variantShredding` is supported?

Reviewer: Actually, the reader requirements below state that, when `variantShredding` is supported (no requirement to enable it), then readers must be prepared to handle `variant` type columns in the schema and variant data (shredded or unshredded) in the parquet. So we really need to require `variantType` in protocol whenever `variantShredding` appears in protocol.

AFAICT, the enablement property only controls whether writers are allowed to produce new files containing shredded variant.

Author: This PR makes the change in the code: https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/6709
Once that is merged, we can modify the spec

Author: PR has been merged. I have updated the spec to add one more bullet stating that `variantType` must also be present.

Reviewer: It should probably be the first bullet, not the last? Also, upon re-reading the text seems pretty jumbled. Can we rework it a bit to separate support from enablement like some other features do?

To support, a writer must:
* Ensure `variantType` and `variantShredding` are both present in the protocol's writer feature list
* Respect the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property configuration (see below)

When supported, readers must be prepared to encounter shredded variant columns in some or all files, even if `delta.enableVariantShredding` is false or missing.

To enable, a writer must:
* Set `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`. If false or missing, writers must not produce new files with shredded variant columns.

When enabled, a writer may produce new files containing shredded variant columns. Writers are not required to produce shredded variant, are allowed to produce a mix of shredded and unshredded variant columns, and the mix or shredding schema may vary from file to file. 

Only a table that supports variant shredding may define the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property configuration.

Default Column Values | **Supported:** A Variant column is allowed to have a default column value.
Change Data Feed | **Supported:** A table using the Variant data type is allowed to enable the Delta Change Data Feed.

# Variant Shredding

This feature enables support for shredding of the Variant data type, to store and query Variant data more efficiently.
Shredding a Variant value takes paths from the Variant value, and stores them as typed columns in the file.
The shredding does not duplicate data, so if a value is stored in the typed column, it is removed from the Variant binary.
Storing Variant values as typed columns is faster to access, and enables data skipping with statistics.

The `variantShredding` feature depends on the `variantType` feature.

Tables supporting Variant Shredding may also contain parquet files containing Variants represented in the "unshredded" format, and individual files may freely mix shredded and unshredded Variant columns.

## Enablement
- The table must be on Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7.
- The feature `variantType` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

> - The feature `variantShredding` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

Reviewer: Doesn't enablement _also_ require `delta.enableVariantShredding=true` (see below)?
Otherwise, it's only _supported_ and writers must not write new files containing shredded variant?

Author: I'm adding that `delta.enableVariantShredding` must be set to `true` for writers to write shredded data. Tables can contain shredded data even if this property is not set (and only the table feature is present).

## Shredded Variant data in Parquet

Shredded Variant data is stored according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md).
The shredded Variant data written to parquet files is written as a single Parquet struct, with the following fields:

Struct field name | Parquet primitive type | Description
-|-|-
metadata | binary | (required) The binary-encoded Variant metadata, as described in [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)
value | binary | (optional) The binary-encoded Variant value, as described in Parquet Variant binary encoding.
typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type representing the data stored in the Variant, so long as the shredding scheme adheres to the Parquet Variant Shredding specification.

## Writer Requirements for Variant Shredding

> Writers must ensure the `variantShredding` table feature is present in the table protocol's `writerFeatures` and `readerFeatures` when enabling the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property, i.e. setting `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`.

Reviewer: This is the first reference of `delta.enableVariantShredding` property, but written as if it were already introduced/explained previously?

Author: Introducing in `Enablement` section now

When Variant Shredding is supported (`writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantShredding`), writers:
- must ensure the `variantType` table feature is present in the table protocol's `writerFeatures` and `readerFeatures`.

> - must respect the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property configuration. If `delta.enableVariantShredding` is not present or if it is set to any value other than `true`, a column of type `variant` must not be written as a shredded Variant, but as an unshredded Variant. If `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`, the writer can choose to shred a Variant column according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md). If `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`, writers are free to write variant columns in the "unshredded" format in parquet files, or write parquet files containing a mix of shredded and unshredded variant columns.

Reviewer: If the feature intro properly distinguishes "supported" vs. "enabled" in terms of this property, then the rest of the spec no longer needs to refer repeatedly to the enablement property.

(see also previous comments)

Reviewer: e.g.
> ## Enablement
>
>  ...
>  * ensure `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`
>
> If `delta.enableVariantShredding` is missing or has any value other than `true`, the feature is only supported, not enabled.

The Writer Requirements would then adjust slightly:
> When Variant Shredding is supported... [mostly the same as now].
>
> When Variant Shredding is enabled, writers can choose to shred a Variant column... [mostly same as now]
>
> Writers must ensure... [moved to bottom but otherwise unchanged]

The Reader Requirements remain correct as-is (it already mentions "supported")

Author: I have now properly distinguished support and enablement in the intro. I don't think I need the "When Variant Shredding is supported" section in the Writer requirements. I am starting with enablement (enablement requires support). I am also adding that if a writer enables variant shredding (sets property to true), they must also add support for shredding.

Author: Done

`delta.parquet.format.version` | Parquet data page format writers SHOULD use for new data files. This property is a directive to writers only; readers do not need to consult it, as Parquet pages are self-describing via the `PageType` field in each page header. Changing this property does not affect existing files; a table MAY contain files written with different data page versions, which is a normal and expected state. | Valid values: `1.0.0` (DataPageV1) and `2.x.x` (DataPageV2, where `x.x` is any minor.patch version). Recommended values are `1.0.0` and `2.12.0`.<br><br>When absent, writers SHOULD default to `1.0.0`. Writers SHOULD validate this property and abort if the value does not match `1.0.0` or `2.MINOR.PATCH`.<br><br>Readers SHOULD support both DataPageV1 and DataPageV2 pages regardless of this property's value. Tables intended for access by engines beyond the Delta Lake connectors SHOULD use `1.0.0`, as DataPageV2 support varies across the broader Parquet ecosystem.

> `delta.enableVariantShredding` | When `true`, writers could write variant data to parquet files in [shredded](#variant-shredding) format. | Valid values: `true` (shredding allowed) and `false` (shredding not allowed).<br><br>When enabled, writers must ensure that the `variantShredding` table feature is present in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

Reviewer: "The property may only appear when the `variantShredding` table feature is present..." ?

Author: I don't think it's important to prohibit the property from being `false` if `variantShredding` is not present in the table. The current implementation in Delta Spark only enforces that the table feature be added if the property is true.

[^1]: String columns are cut off at a fixed prefix length. Timestamp columns are truncated down to milliseconds.

### Statistics for Variant Columns

- The `nullCount` stat for a Variant column is a LONG representing the nullcount for the Variant column itself (nullcount stats are not captured for individual paths within the Variant).
- The `minValues` and `maxValues` stats for a Variant column are Variant objects, where the object keys are [normalized JSON path expressions](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9535.html#name-normalized-paths), and the object values are the primitive Variant values representing the lower and upper bound for that field.

> - In JSON, the `minValues` and `maxValues` stats for a Variant column are [binary-encoded](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md) Variant values, concatenating the `metadata` and `value`, and serialized to strings using [z85](https://rfc.zeromq.org/spec/32/) encoding (see example below).

Reviewer: So a reader has to parse the `metadata` header byte to figure out the byte offset of the `value`?

Author: Yes

- In Parquet, the `minValues` and `maxValues` stats for a Variant column are Parquet Variant columns, following the Parquet Variant [encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md) and [shredding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md) specifications.
- In Parquet, the Variant `minValues` and `maxValues` stats are allowed to be shredded, but it is not required.
- Each path in the Variant `minValues` (`maxValues`) value is the independently computed min (max) stat for the corresponding path in the file's Variant data, so e.g. `minValues.v:a` and `minValues.v:b` could come from different rows in the file.
- Min/max stats may only be written for primitive (leaf) values, packed into a Variant representation.
- Min/max stats may only be written for a path if that path has the same data type in every row of the data file.

> - The paths and types inside `minValues` and `maxValues` must be the same within any one file, but can vary from file to file.

Reviewer: I thought there was a recent change to the RFC that min/max didn't have to have the same paths, but that any paths in common must have the same type? (to be consistent with normal min/max stats)

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. I'll fix it! I think I started off with an outdated master. I fixed the shredding descriptions but not the stats descriptions.

Author: Done

> - The paths and types inside `minValues` and `maxValues` must be the same within any one file, but can vary from file to file.

Author: ```suggestion
- If a path is present in both minValues and maxValues for a given file, the Variant type for that path must be the same in both.
- A path may be present in minValues but not maxValues (or vice versa) for a given file. The paths and types can vary from file to file.
```
